And I'm really interested in this new book that I'm working on.
You know, books of the future, don't we?
Books... I spent several days out at Cornell University last week where they're digitizing things.
They're putting on books on computers.
We could talk about it, but they're doing it there to the point that they are some books that they are...
putting it on the computer and then they're destroying the books and sending the books off to the landfill.
And then there's this whole question of the relevance of the book.
Do you have any thoughts on the book with a capital B or however you want to approach it?
I think that these advances in technology are very important for research institutions.
It's, I presume, the only way to go simply in terms of space.
And access, of course.
And access, it's wonderful.
But in the respect of the love of reading, the interaction, the communion with books, I am very old-fashioned and I really believe that the
the physicality of that exchange where you can smell the book and see it and touch it and turn back the pages and re-read and linger and again go back. Nothing else can. And I think in a world where one gets more and more remote from whatever one may call reality from where things happen
Because everything is at a distance, in a way, which removes the sense of responsibility for what you're doing.
Even a nuclear war is made by somebody pressing a button and the bomb explodes over there.
The book and its immediacy and its physicality, I think, retains something which is vital to
to being human.
Psychologists who've made tests with children or with monkeys or whatever who are deprived from contact with a mother where they never touched and they lose the whole dimension of being in the process and I think this sort of dimension which books can provide cannot be replaced by anything else.
In your country, how important are books to the national... Well, in my country, in terms of reading, probably the prime problem at the moment is the fact that we have about 60% illiteracy in the country of the total population.
Which means that, in fact, writers can't really start talking about their readership before massive programs of literacy have been mounted.
In this process, books are tremendously important, but also the computers and CD-ROM and so on, to get these literacy programs rolling.
But, again, it is that awareness that you are in touch with something now, physically in touch with something, which I think lends it a dimension of nothing else than supplant.
I didn't realize that the literacy rate was that high.
It's enormous, 60%.
So when you're writing, then you write with the understanding that, right off the bat, six out of ten people can't, you can't reach 60% of the people in your commission.
You're mindful of that when you're writing?
It is a terrible film.
Inevitably, one is shaped by a specific community and
In your writing you direct yourself at this community in the first instance.
And if six out of ten in this community can't read you, it creates problems.
which is why during the years of the struggle for liberation so much of the really valid writing in the country that was done by black authors was in the form of poetry, plays, or very short stories that could be recited to deal with all the interest.
The sound of a voice plays a very important role.
And maybe one reason why now
After an absence of over 20 years, I am also returning to the theatre.
I've just finished my first play in 20 years, and it is a very particular joy to working in the theatre and writing for it.
It is such an old cliché that writing is a lonely business.
But when you're in the theatre and the interaction with actors and the director and the stage, that folds a kind of void which is very important.
I just did an interview about three weeks ago with Neil Simon for his new work.
You know, just the whole attitude of writing for performance.
It's different.
He reads his material aloud.
He wants to hear the words.
The way they will sound, you know, in tongues of actors.
I just had a wonderful experience a month ago in Salzburg.
There was a conference where...
Three of us, Arthur Miller, Ariel Dorfman and I, had to conduct master classes and lecture and work with groups of actors and directors.
Huge international gathering.
And that really fired me up so much that we sang back.
So this play that you're working on, is there an expectation that it will be...
those people who are unable to read your books.
That's what I hope, yes.
So then, as a writer, you're still doing the same thing, still trying to reach people.
Oh, yes, yes.
I mean, ultimately, it's the same sort of thing.
Medium, medium.
I would think writing for performance is going to be even harder than writing for poetry.
In a way, it is, because...
In a way, it is always disheartening because there are always other people in between.
Ultimately, it's the actor and his or her way of speaking that's going to get the message across or influence the audience or whatever.
But I think you gain so much too in the process by exchanging your ideas and throwing them around and seeing them develop in their production.
Of course, when you're writing...
character for the stage, as Neil Simon said, he said he never thinks of an actor.
He never even really visualizes the character, because the hope is, if it's really good, you know, the actors yet unborn would be kind of doing it.
You know, when you're writing for a movie, well,
a one-shot deal, it's only going to be done once.
Yes, that's the story, yes.
You know, a play on the other hand.
Hundreds of times by different people, every time you can discover something new, even in an awful performance, it's usually just at least a moment here or there where you discover something new about yourself.
I believe that your next interview is in 10 minutes, so I don't want to know... Well, I think we've covered all this amount of knowledge.
Would you kindly inscribe that?
Do you consider yourself a political person?
Are you a political person?
A political creature, so to speak?
No, I'm not a political creature.
I had to incorporate a lot of reasonably practical politics in my whole modus operandi during the apartheid years when I was only too aware of the fact that as a writer I had access to audiences across the world really and that as a result of that I had a certain responsibility
towards people in South Africa who could not at that stage speak for themselves, make themselves heard of them.
I was very close to many members of the ANC in exile, and at a time when that movement was proscribed in South Africa, I felt it was necessary for me to simply to let other people know what
what the people inside the ANC were really like because they were just branded by the blanket term of terrorist and it was sometimes very difficult and amusing even to sit in Lusaka and listen to Beethoven's Fifth with one of these people and you're supposed to be a terrorist and it's so different.
And just getting this across in the first instance to watch in South Africa.
Not only a terrorist, but in some ways a savage.
Do you ever listen to Beethoven?
Certainly.
Couldn't read.
Yes.
So I felt it was very important for me, since I had this measure of fluidity in my movements, to transmit something of what I'd witnessed.
But now it is just as much of a pleasure to be able to be a writer who continues to have a real interest in what is happening politically.
But that is part of a larger human scene and the politicians can and must now speak for themselves.
a very important question all of a sudden.
How many languages have you published?
29.
And 60% of the people in your own country are ready to get to read.
So therefore, are you mindful of writing?
Are you all the audience?
Well, when I write in English, that is the kind of reader I have to bear in mind.
But when I write an upper part... Are there any people outside of the borders of the country?
Yes, yes, in the first instance when I write English.
And obviously that must change something in the tone, in the approach, in the perspective one.
You're alert to this, you're aware of it.
Yes.
And you certainly have no way of visualizing who the reader is.
No.
Potential reader is an opinion.
No, in fact, if I would try to visualize that, I could be very far off the mark.
That's fascinating.
But you have to be mindful of it.
I have to try, try to be aware of it.
Do you hear from readers all over the world?
Yes, that is one of the really profound pleasures of writing.
Just to know that there are people out there who in fact read what I write, who respond to a touch, sometimes get angry more often than not, or respond very generously.
Is course intelligent most of the time?
All kinds.
Some very, very naïve, gutsy things.
One of the most touching responses I had very recently, a few months ago, and that apropos of a book that I published twenty years ago, An Instant in the Wind, was from a woman, an Indian woman, I think, living in Britain.
wanting to know the address of somebody she could send flowers to to put on a grave of one of my characters.
And it was a fictitious character.
Wow.
And I found that so touching.
How did you respond?
I had to explain to her as gently as possible that this was a fictitious character.
But she also, she wrote back again and said, it doesn't matter.
I know that person lived.
Even if you didn't know her.
I know she lived.
What a feeling that must be.
It is wonderful.
You really did create.
Yes, somebody's so alive to somebody else.
You waved the wand and you created something out of imagination.
It's magnificent now.
And then briefly, what is the book on Shakespeare about?
Is it about his time?
It's just titled Destabilizing Shakespeare, in line with so many of the new readings, sort of deconstructive readings, but I don't try to do a vicious dismantling job or anything, but just to see what kinds of new meanings come to light if you read a bit differently, a bit off-key.
And the gender issue is very central to that.
The whole notion of kingship and the repressions that went on there and the discomfort that he and others must have felt by having a queen on the throne of England.
And there were strange masked ways in which he found his way around that.
And that was when he's changed.
That was changed to Goldberg's 1603, I think.
Oh, yes.
Yes.
That is the miracle of that corpus of work.
That's right.
That it is so incredibly relevant to us today still.
Yeah.
You see, when people say, who needs to read these dead and white European novels?
Because they're not relevant.
You said, Jake, there's not a lot of them.
God.
He's as relevant as anyone I can possibly read.
Oh, yes.
Well, I really have fun with this stuff.
Now we have to go.